DEMOSAICING GAIN RESEARCH ANSWERS

MY QUESTION
When taking the RGGB values from raw mosaic images, instead of just applying a constant gain/exposure to every part, and then applying a tone curve mapping adjustment to it (which i understand works well because, if you get it right, your 10 bit and up images contain enough minuet changes to be spread out without loosing visual quality, but could we also have the option, of touching the actual gain values ourselves, by using a texture mask, that is the resolution AND bit depth of what our image will be, and then using the logic of "whiter means more", "darker means less", and using it to individually adjust gain to parts of the image? I think having the same bit depth is important for the texture because we want them to contain the same level of information so that we are touching all of the different values equally across the image with the texture. Then would it be possible to create some sort of an automatic mode where the code runs the image data (like the raw, non-demosaicked data from the sensor) through multiple different constant whole-image gain/exposure values? It looks at what parts of the image, when demosaicked, have the most detail at all of the different constant gain values, and then creates a mask that we talked about and applies it to the image for the demosaicking in order to achieve what we just described. This sounds somewhat like multi-frame HDR, and in a sense it is. It makes it easier because we have so much information to work with, and we are able to create multiple normal images from one container of sensor data because we can apply different gain amounts to it. With a really low gain, really bright areas of the image may contain perfect data and not be just full white. With a really high gain, we might be able to see detail in the dark parts of the image that would blow out the highlights. 
Do some research on this, and don't give me an answer that is simple or just "you could do this, but I'm not going to actually tell you how." Please tell me if people have done this before, and if this process makes sense, or if parts of it are wrong or parts of it are right, or if there are fundamental errors with the thinking behind this. 



CHAT GPT'S ANSWER
I’ll treat this as a real RAW-pipeline design question, not a “sure maybe” answer. I’m going to check what exists around single-RAW HDR, exposure fusion, spatially varying gain, dual-gain sensors, and RAW-domain tone mapping, then separate what’s physically valid from what’s just a useful editing trick.

Thought for 33s and researched

Yes — the idea mostly makes sense, and people have done versions of it before. But there’s one huge correction: from one normal RAW capture, making multiple “exposures” by multiplying gain does not create new highlight/shadow information. It creates multiple renderings of the same captured sensor data. That is still useful, but it is closer to single-RAW exposure fusion / local tone mapping / dodge-and-burn in linear RAW space, not true multi-frame HDR.

The physically correct version is: RAW has one captured photon count per photosite. You can multiply that data differently in different regions using a mask, and that can produce a very powerful local exposure system. But it cannot recover values that were clipped at the sensor, and it cannot magically improve the real signal-to-noise ratio in dark areas. Brightening shadows reveals the captured data plus the captured noise. Darkening highlights preserves detail only if those highlights were not already clipped in the RAW values.

The core idea in your words, cleaned up

You’re describing a RAW-domain local exposure map:

output_raw_or_linear = raw_linear * exposure_gain(x, y)

where exposure_gain(x, y) is controlled by a mask or generated automatically. White means “use more gain,” black means “use less gain,” and gray means intermediate gain.

That is absolutely a valid image-processing operation. In fact, darktable’s exposure module works in the scene-referred, linear camera RGB part of the pipeline before the input color profile is applied, which is very close in spirit to “exposure adjustment before the pretty display transform.” RawTherapee also has local-adjustment systems with masks/spot logic for selectively applying processing, though its exact UI/algorithm is not the same as your proposed texture-mask system.

The more advanced automatic version you described is basically:

Take the RAW.
Render it at several exposure/gain values, like -3 EV, -2 EV, -1 EV, 0 EV, +1 EV, +2 EV, +3 EV.
Analyze which exposure has the best usable detail per region.
Build a smooth exposure mask/map.
Apply that map back to the RAW/linear image before final tone mapping.

That exists conceptually. It overlaps heavily with exposure fusion, where multiple exposure images are blended using weight maps for qualities like local contrast, saturation, and well-exposedness. The classic Mertens/Kautz/Van Reeth exposure-fusion paper explicitly uses weight maps to decide which pixels from which exposure should contribute to the final image, and it does this without first building a physically calibrated HDR image. OpenCV also describes HDR/exposure-fusion workflows from exposure sequences.

The special twist in your idea is that the exposure stack is generated from one RAW instead of multiple captured exposures. People do this in practice too: a common single-RAW trick is to export several TIFFs from one RAW at different exposure settings and blend them with exposure-fusion tools like Enfuse. That can look natural because it uses the RAW’s hidden highlight/shadow latitude, but it still does not extend the original captured dynamic range.

The part that is right

Your idea is strongest when you treat it as local exposure control inside a high-bit-depth linear pipeline.

RAW sensor data is usually linear, meaning the numeric value is roughly proportional to captured light after black-level subtraction and normalization. That makes gain/exposure multiplication mathematically clean. A +1 EV adjustment is just multiplying linear values by 2. A -1 EV adjustment is multiplying by 0.5. This is exactly why scene-referred workflows are so powerful: you do the big exposure/light work while the image is still linear, then tone-map later for display. Darktable’s scene-referred workflow is built around this kind of thinking.

Your texture-mask concept is also valid. A mask can control a continuous exposure field:

mask = 0.0  -> low gain / protect highlights
mask = 0.5  -> normal gain
mask = 1.0  -> high gain / lift shadows

A better mapping would usually be EV-based rather than raw multiplier-based:

EV(x,y) = mix(minEV, maxEV, mask(x,y))
gain(x,y) = 2 ^ EV(x,y)
linear_out(x,y) = linear_in(x,y) * gain(x,y)

That gives a natural photographer-friendly control: -3 EV to +3 EV, for example.

Your “same resolution” instinct is also mostly right. If the mask is the same resolution as the RAW/image, you can target local areas very precisely. For an editor like Stack, this would be a powerful feature because the mask could be hand-painted, generated from luminance, imported as a texture, made from another image, or produced by a node graph.

The part that is partly wrong: same bit depth is not as important as you think

You said the mask should be the same resolution and bit depth as the image so it can “touch all values equally.” Same resolution matters more than same bit depth.

A mask is not storing scene light. It is storing control weights. A 16-bit or float mask is great because it avoids banding in smooth gradients, but it does not need to match the RAW’s exact bit depth. A 14-bit RAW does not require a 14-bit mask. In most serious pipelines, you would probably store the mask as float32 internally, with values from 0.0 to 1.0, regardless of whether the original RAW was 10-bit, 12-bit, 14-bit, or 16-bit.

So the better rule is:

RAW/image data: preserve as high precision linear data, preferably float.
Mask data: use float or at least 16-bit if smooth gradients matter.
Preview/export: can be 8-bit, 10-bit, 16-bit, PNG/TIFF/etc.

A low-bit-depth mask can cause visible stepping if it controls exposure strongly, especially in skies or soft gradients. But it does not need to be “the same bit depth” to affect the image correctly. It just needs enough precision for smooth weights.

The biggest physical limit: digital gain is not the same as new exposure

This is the main thing to be careful about.

When the camera captures a RAW image, the sensor has already collected photons. After that moment, multiplying the numbers is just digital scaling. It cannot create photons that were not captured.

So this statement from your idea is only true in a limited way:

With a really low gain, really bright areas of the image may contain perfect data and not be just full white.

That is true only if the RAW data was not clipped. If the RAW photosites are below saturation, lowering gain can reveal highlight texture that a normal JPEG/tone curve would have blown to white. But if the sensor value hit the RAW white level, the detail is gone. Multiplying clipped values down just gives you flat gray/white with no texture.

And this statement is also only partly true:

With a really high gain, we might be able to see detail in the dark parts of the image.

Yes, but you also amplify noise. Shadow data in RAW can be very useful, especially from modern sensors, but high gain does not improve the captured SNR. It reveals whatever signal is there plus read noise, shot noise, quantization noise, color noise, banding, etc. Research on HDR with spatially varying SNR points out that dark regions in HDR scenes can have severe noise problems, and ordinary HDR fusion/denoising methods can fail when noise varies strongly across the image.

This is also why real HDR capture uses actual different exposures or sensor tricks. Traditional HDR captures multiple exposures so different frames genuinely collect different amounts of light. Single-shot HDR sensors can use multi-exposure CFAs, interlaced exposures, quad-Bayer patterns, or dual conversion gain. A 2023 ICCV paper on single-shot HDR explains that modern sensors can capture different exposure times and colors in one RAW-like pattern, but also notes that gain-based exposure variation alone only gives minor dynamic-range improvement because changing gain does not capture different amounts of photo energy.

That line is basically the “physics check” for your idea: post-capture gain is useful for rendering, but real extra dynamic range requires either unclipped RAW headroom, multiple captures, or sensor-level multi-exposure/dual-gain data.

Has this been done before?

Yes, in several related forms.

1. Exposure fusion: This is the closest classic algorithm. It blends multiple exposure versions using weight maps based on qualities like contrast, saturation, and well-exposedness. The original paper describes fusing a bracketed sequence directly into a high-quality image without first making a calibrated HDR image, guided by per-pixel/per-region weight maps.

2. Single-RAW pseudo exposure fusion: People have exported multiple versions of the same RAW at different exposure settings and fused them. This is not true HDR expansion, but it can produce natural-looking highlight/shadow balancing from one RAW if the original capture has enough latitude.

3. Local exposure tools in RAW editors: darktable, RawTherapee, Lightroom, Capture One, etc. all have forms of local exposure/tone control. darktable’s exposure module specifically works in linear scene-referred camera RGB by default, and users commonly use masks or multiple module instances for local balancing.

4. RAW-domain HDR reconstruction research: There is active research on reconstructing HDR from RAW data. RawHDR, for example, learns exposure masks and uses RAW sensor data to recover difficult dark/bright regions better than methods starting from 8-bit sRGB. Another RAW HDR paper argues that RAW images contain more delicate sensor details than sRGB and proposes RAW-domain HDR reconstruction models/datasets.

5. Sensor-level spatially varying exposure/gain: There are papers and camera technologies where different pixels/lines/groups are captured at different exposures or gains. That is much closer to true single-shot HDR, because the sensor itself captures different exposure information. The quad-Bayer/time-varying exposure paper is an example of that direction. There is also older work on reconstructing HDR images from a single CFA RAW image with spatially varying per-pixel gain.

So yes, your idea is not random. You’re orbiting a real family of techniques: RAW-domain local exposure mapping, exposure fusion, single-image HDR reconstruction, and sensor-level single-shot HDR.

Where I would put this in the pipeline

For a practical image editor, I would not start by applying a crazy per-pixel gain directly to the raw mosaic before demosaicing unless you have a specific reason. It can work, but it is easier to create color artifacts.

A safer first version would be:

1. Load RAW mosaic.
2. Subtract black level.
3. Normalize by white level.
4. Apply white balance / camera channel calibration.
5. Demosaic to linear RGB.
6. Build or load exposure mask.
7. Apply local exposure gain in linear RGB.
8. Optional denoise / local contrast / highlight reconstruction.
9. Tone map / filmic curve / display transform.
10. Export.

This gives you the visual behavior you want without making the demosaicer fight a spatially inconsistent RAW signal.

A more advanced version could work earlier:

1. Load RAW mosaic.
2. Subtract black level.
3. Normalize.
4. Generate a smooth exposure gain map.
5. Apply gain to CFA samples.
6. Demosaic with awareness of the gain map.
7. Continue normal pipeline.

But if you apply a strong gain map before demosaicing, the demosaicer may interpret gain transitions as real scene edges. That can create false color, zippering, weird green/magenta transitions, or detail hallucinations. Demosaicing already mixes nearby color samples to infer missing colors; LibRaw discusses how demosaicing inevitably mixes neighboring channel noise/detail, which is why CFA-domain noise/detail behavior is delicate.

For Stack, I’d build the feature first in linear RGB after demosaic, then later experiment with a RAW-CFA mode.

How the automatic mode could actually work

The automatic mode should not simply choose “most detail” blindly. It needs a scoring function.

You could generate a bank of linear renderings:

EV bank:
-4, -3, -2, -1, 0, +1, +2, +3, +4

For each EV version, demosaic or preview-render it, then compute quality maps.

Useful quality signals:

Highlight safety:
penalize pixels close to clipping

Shadow safety:
penalize pixels too close to black / noise floor

Local contrast:
reward regions with real edge/detail energy

Noise estimate:
penalize boosted shadow detail if it is mostly noise

Color stability:
penalize regions where one channel clips or color ratios become unstable

Well-exposedness:
reward mid-range linear/display values, not crushed shadows or blown highlights

Classic exposure fusion uses ideas like contrast, saturation, and well-exposedness as weight maps. Your RAW version should add RAW-specific logic: black level, white level, channel clipping, sensor noise model, and maybe green-channel detail confidence.

Then you produce weights:

weight_ev_n(x,y) = quality_score(image_ev_n, x, y)

Normalize them:

weight_ev_n /= sum(weights at x,y)

Then either blend the exposure-rendered images:

fused(x,y) = sum(weight_ev_n(x,y) * image_ev_n(x,y))

or convert the selected exposure weights into one continuous exposure map:

EV_map(x,y) = sum(weight_ev_n(x,y) * EV_n)
gain_map(x,y) = 2 ^ EV_map(x,y)
linear_out = linear_base * gain_map

The second option is closer to your texture-mask idea. It creates a real editable mask/map rather than only a fused output.

Very important: the mask must be smooth, not noisy

If the automatic mask changes too quickly, it will look awful. You’ll get halos, crunchy texture, local contrast weirdness, and “HDR slime.” The mask should usually be lower frequency than the image itself.

Good methods:

Use a guided filter or bilateral filter on the exposure map.
Use a Laplacian pyramid / multiresolution blend.
Limit max EV change per pixel neighborhood.
Protect edges but avoid tiny per-pixel exposure decisions.
Let user control smoothness/radius.

Exposure fusion often uses multiresolution/pyramid blending for exactly this reason: direct per-pixel blending creates seams and halos, while pyramid blending lets different spatial frequencies blend more naturally.

For Stack, I’d expose controls like:

Auto Exposure Map Strength
Highlight Protection
Shadow Lift Limit
Noise Protection
Mask Smoothness
Edge Awareness
Max Local EV Range
Show Mask Preview

That would make it feel like a serious image-editing feature instead of a magic HDR button.

What should happen with RGGB specifically?

Because RGGB has two green samples, you need to be careful about how the mask maps to the mosaic.

For a manual texture mask, there are two possible meanings:

Image-space mask:
same width/height as final image or RAW visible area.
Each sensor photosite samples the mask at its position.

Packed RGGB mask:
one mask value per RGGB group, or separate masks for R, G1, G2, B.

For most editing, use an image-space luminance/exposure mask, not separate masks per channel. Exposure is a light-intensity operation, so usually it should affect R, G, and B consistently. If you allow separate channel masks, that becomes a color-correction/channel-math feature, not pure exposure.

The two green channels can be useful for analysis because green has more spatial samples and often carries much of the luminance/detail structure. But for exposure gain, I would usually derive the detail/confidence map from green/luminance, then apply the resulting exposure map equally to all channels to avoid color shifts.

What parts are fundamentally impossible?

These are the hard walls:

You cannot recover RAW-clipped highlights by lowering gain afterward.

You cannot create real clean shadow signal if the sensor captured mostly noise.

You cannot get true multi-exposure HDR from one normal single-gain RAW unless the sensor actually encoded multiple exposures/gains or there is unclipped headroom already present.

You cannot treat post-capture gain as physically identical to longer exposure because longer exposure collects more photons, while digital gain only multiplies existing numbers.

You cannot let a high-frequency mask hit CFA samples aggressively without risking demosaic artifacts.

That 2023 single-shot HDR paper states the key limitation very clearly: gain-based exposure variation does not capture different amounts of photo energy, so its dynamic-range improvement is limited compared with true time-varying exposures.

What parts are genuinely powerful?

These parts are very real and worth building:

Manual RAW/linear exposure masks.

Automatic exposure-map generation from RAW analysis.

Single-RAW exposure fusion for natural highlight/shadow balancing.

RAW-aware highlight protection.

Shadow lift with noise-aware limiting.

Editable generated masks.

Node-graph exposure maps that can be painted, blurred, inverted, clamped, mixed, or driven by luminance/channels.

A “render exposure stack from one RAW” preview mode.

A “true HDR only if multiple RAWs or sensor multi-gain data exists” distinction.

This could become a genuinely cool Stack feature because it gives the user both the automatic “make this look balanced” behavior and the advanced “let me touch the exposure field myself” behavior.

The cleanest name for the feature

I would avoid calling it “HDR from one RAW” as the main name, because that promises too much. Better names:

RAW Exposure Map
Linear Exposure Mask
Adaptive RAW Exposure
Single-RAW Exposure Fusion
Scene-Referred Exposure Field
RAW Local Gain Map

Internally, I’d think of it as:

Scene-referred local exposure mapping with optional exposure-fusion mask generation.

That sounds fancy, but it’s accurate.

My honest verdict

Your thinking is mostly right as an editing/rendering pipeline, but partly wrong as a physical HDR capture model.

The correct version is not “we create multiple normal images from one RAW and recover different true exposures.” The correct version is “we create multiple exposure renderings from one high-bit-depth linear RAW, analyze which rendering is most useful per region, then build a smooth local exposure map that preserves highlights and lifts shadows as much as the captured data allows.”

That is a real, useful, buildable feature. It is basically single-RAW exposure fusion plus RAW-aware local exposure masking. It will not beat true bracketed HDR or sensor-level multi-exposure HDR for extreme scenes, but it can absolutely produce better-looking results than one global exposure plus one global tone curve, especially for high-bit-depth RAW files with good highlight headroom and clean shadow data.